docs: Add doc page on enabling Intel GPUs for dss (#160)
canonical/data-science-stack: docs/how-to/enable-intel-gpu.rst

.. _enable_intel_gpu:

Enable Intel GPUs
=============================

This guide describes how to configure DSS to utilise the Intel GPUs on your machine. This can be done by enabling the Intel device plugin on your MicroK8s cluster.

Prerequisites
-------------

* :ref:`DSS is installed <install_DSS_CLI>` and :ref:`initialised <initialise_DSS>`.

> * The `kubectl` snap package is installed.

Reviewer: Can we add a link to `kubectl` installation or similar?

Reviewer 2: Added.

* Your machine includes an Intel GPU.
  

> Verify the Intel GPU drivers are installed in your machine

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Verify your Intel GPU drivers 
```

----------------------------------------------------------

To confirm that your machine has the Intel GPU drivers set up, install the `intel-gpu-tools` package:

.. code-block:: bash

   sudo apt install intel-gpu-tools

And list the Intel GPU devices on your machine as follows:

.. code-block:: bash

   intel_gpu_top -L

If the drivers are correctly installed, you should see information about your GPU device such as the following:

.. code-block::

   card0                    8086:56a0
   pci:vendor=8086,device=56A0,card=0
   └─renderD128 

.. note::

>    For Intel discrete GPUs on Ubuntu version older than 24.04, you may need to perform additional steps like install a `HWE kernel <https://ubuntu.com/kernel/lifecycle>`_.   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   For Intel discrete GPUs on Ubuntu versions older than 24.04, you may need to perform additional steps such as installing a `HWE kernel <https://ubuntu.com/kernel/lifecycle>`_.   
```

Reviewer 2: Updated.

Configure the kubectl snap for MicroK8s
---------------------------------------

Create a configuration file so that `kubectl` can communicate with MicroK8s by running:

.. code-block:: bash
                
  mkdir -p ~/.kube
  microk8s config > ~/.kube/config

> Enable the Intel GPU plugin in your Kubernetes cluster 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enable the Intel GPU plugin
```

Reviewer 2: Updated.

.. code-block:: bash

  VERSION=v0.30.0
  kubectl kustomize https://github.com/intel/intel-device-plugins-for-kubernetes/deployments/nfd?ref=${VERSION} > node_feature_discovery.yaml
  kubectl kustomize https://github.com/intel/intel-device-plugins-for-kubernetes/deployments/nfd/overlays/node-feature-rules?ref=${VERSION} > node_feature_rules.yaml
  kubectl kustomize https://github.com/intel/intel-device-plugins-for-kubernetes/deployments/gpu_plugin/overlays/nfd_labeled_nodes?ref=${VERSION} > gpu_plugin.yaml

To allow multiple containers to utilise the same GPU, run:

.. code-block:: bash
                
  sed -i 's/enable-monitoring/enable-monitoring\n        - -shared-dev-num=10/' gpu_plugin.yaml

Finally, apply the built YAML files to your MicroK8s cluster as follows:

.. code-block:: bash
                
  kubectl apply -f node_feature_discovery.yaml
  kubectl apply -f node_feature_rules.yaml
  kubectl apply -f gpu_plugin.yaml

The MicroK8s cluster is now configured to recognise and utilise your Intel GPU.

.. note::
 After the YAML configuration files have been applied, they can be safely deleted.

> Verify the Intel GPU plugin is installed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Verify the Intel GPU plugin
```

Reviewer 2: Updated.

.. _enable_intel_gpu:

Enable Intel GPUs
=============================

This guide describes how to configure DSS to utilise the Intel GPUs on your machine. This can be done by enabling the Intel device plugin on your MicroK8s cluster.

Prerequisites
-------------

> * :ref:`DSS CLI is installed <install_DSS_CLI>` and :ref:`initialised <initialise_DSS>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* :ref:`DSS is installed <install_DSS_CLI>` and :ref:`initialised <initialise_DSS>`.
```

> * Your machine has an Intel GPU.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* An Intel GPU installed in your machine.
```

Author: Are we sure "installed" is a good word here? We want the PC to have it, "install" for me points to software installation.

Reviewer: Good point. Let's go with "Your machine includes an Intel GPU". I wasn't happy with using "have" in this context.

Author: Agreed

Install the Intel GPU plugin
----------------------------

To ensure DSS can utilise Intel GPUs:
1. The Intel GPU drivers must be installed.

> 2. MicroK8s must be set up to utilise the Intel GPU drivers.   

Reviewer: Can we add a link for further info to this point?

Author: I will add hyperlinks on the sections

Author: Because I changed the structure of each sections, this list is not longer needed

Verify the Intel GPU drivers are installed in your machine
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To confirm that your machine has the Intel GPU drivers set up, install the `intel-gpu-tools` package:

.. code-block:: bash

   sudo apt install intel-gpu-tools

> To list the Intel GPU devices on your machine, run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And list the Intel GPU devices on your machine as follows:
```

.. code-block:: bash

   intel_gpu_top -L

> If the drivers are correctly installed, you should receive information about your GPU device from the command's output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the drivers are correctly installed, you should see information about your GPU device such as the following:
```
Can we add the output as a command bash code example?

Author: Just added an example output of an Intel discrete GPU

.. note::

>    For Intel discrete GPUs on older versions of Ubuntu like 22.04, you may need to perform additional steps like install a `HWE kernel <https://ubuntu.com/kernel/lifecycle>`_.   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   For Intel discrete GPUs on older versions of Ubuntu like 22.04, you may need to perform additional steps such as installing a `HWE kernel <https://ubuntu.com/kernel/lifecycle>`_.   
```
Which version of Ubuntu are we using for this guide?

Author: I used 24.04, but it can be used on older versions as well (22.04 for sure). Should we specify a minimum Ubuntu version in the requirements?

Reviewer: Let's go with this then: "For Intel GPUs on Ubuntu versions older than 24.04, you may need to perform additional steps such as installing a `HWE kernel <https://ubuntu.com/kernel/lifecycle>`". 
Note that I am also removing the "discrete" word. Add if it is actually important in this case. I am not aware of what implies for GPUs.

Author: I think it's worth keeping after my conversation with Will French, it should be only for discrete GPUs.

Install the kubectl snap
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

First, install the `kubectl` snap package:

.. code-block:: bash
				
  sudo snap install kubectl --classic

Create a configuration file so that `kubectl` can communicate with MicroK8s by running:

.. code-block:: bash
				
  mkdir -p ~/.kube
  microk8s config > ~/.kube/config

Enable the Intel GPU plugin in your Kubernetes cluster 
------------------------------------------------------

> To ensure DSS can utilise Intel GPUs, you have to enable the Intel GPU plugin in your Kubernetes cluster. To enable the plugin, you must download the appropriate `kustomization.yaml` files from `Intel device plugins for Kubernetes`_ repository, run `kubectl kustomize` to build YAML configuration files, and then apply them on your MicroK8s cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To ensure DSS can utilise Intel GPUs, you have to enable the Intel GPU plugin in your Kubernetes cluster. To enable the plugin, download the appropriate `kustomization.yaml` files from `Intel device plugins for Kubernetes`_ repository, run `kubectl kustomize` to build the YAML configuration files, and then apply them on your MicroK8s cluster.
```

Reviewer: What do we mean with appropriate here? That needs context

Author: I don't think it is used correctly by me. I just mean to download three specific `kustomization.yaml` files, the ones we actually need. How should I phrase it?

Reviewer: Then, add the names of these three files specifically, in a bulleted point list for instance. Also because the link you provide it is just a GH repo, the user won't know what to do next when they land at that page, so better specify here in our guide which files are needed.

Author: I refactored the section to be more concise.

> First, build the YAML files for Node Feature Discovery, Node Feature Rules, and the GPU plugin, by running:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, build the YAML files for Node Feature Discovery, Node Feature Rules, and the GPU plugin by running the following:
```

.. code-block:: bash

  VERSION=v0.30.0
  kubectl kustomize https://github.com/intel/intel-device-plugins-for-kubernetes/deployments/nfd?ref=${VERSION} > node_feature_discovery.yaml
  kubectl kustomize https://github.com/intel/intel-device-plugins-for-kubernetes/deployments/nfd/overlays/node-feature-rules?ref=${VERSION} > node_feature_rules.yaml
  kubectl kustomize https://github.com/intel/intel-device-plugins-for-kubernetes/deployments/gpu_plugin/overlays/nfd_labeled_nodes?ref=${VERSION} > gpu_plugin.yaml

To allow multiple containers to utilise the same GPU, run:

.. code-block:: bash
				
  sed -i 's/enable-monitoring/enable-monitoring\n        - -shared-dev-num=10/' gpu_plugin.yaml

> Then, apply the built YAML files to your MicroK8s cluster by running:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, apply the built YAML files to your MicroK8s cluster as follows:
```

.. code-block:: bash
				
  kubectl apply -f node_feature_discovery.yaml
  kubectl apply -f node_feature_rules.yaml
  kubectl apply -f gpu_plugin.yaml

The MicroK8s cluster is now configured to recognise and utilise your Intel GPU.

.. note::
 After the YAML configuration files have been applied, they can be safely deleted.

Verify the Intel GPU plugin is installed

> ----------------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-------------------------------------------------
```
It needs to cover the entire heading, otherwise you get an error. That's why the current deployment built is broken

.. _enable_intel_gpu:

Enable Intel GPUs
=============================

This guide describes how to configure DSS to utilise the Intel GPUs on your machine. This can be done by enabling the Intel device plugin on your MicroK8s cluster.

Prerequisites
-------------

* :ref:`MicroK8s is installed <set_microk8s>`.
* :ref:`DSS CLI is installed <install_DSS_CLI>`.

> * The Intel GPU is recognised by your machine. This can be confirmed by running `intel_gpu_top` from the `intel-gpu-tools` package. For discrete GPUs on older versions of Ubuntu like 22.04, you may need to perform additional steps like install a HWE kernel.

Reviewer 3: Let's only mention Intel GPU here, and have a dedicated section for verifying the Intel GPU down below with the exact commands someone needs to write to verify the GPU is visible

Reviewer 3: Although, looking at the NVIDIA how-to, we don't have as a requirement to have an NVIDIA GPU there. @afgambin should we include the need of the GPU in the prerequisites of both guides?

Author: @kimwnasptd I have a question about the requirements. The second requirement (installation of the DSS CLI) has a link to a tutorial, and in that tutorial there is a section about installing MicroK8s, so MicroK8s is a requirement for DSS. In that case, isn't the first point (MicroK8s) redundant, since users will already have it installed when following the tutorial for setting up DSS.

Reviewer: Good points. Regarding Kimonas' suggestion about a dedicated section for verifying the GPU, let's go for it.

Regarding about intalling MicroK8S, I agree it is implicit in the DSS installation. So, yes, I would remove the first item (also, for the NVIDIA guide, can you do it as well Manos as part of this PR)?

So, prerequisites are:
- DSS installed (link to get started tutorial)
- Intel/NVIDIA GPU on your machine.

Reviewer 3: Don't have a hard preference. Indeed only linking to having DSS initialised and point to the tutorial could handle users installing MicroK8s the way we want it.

SGTM to only point to havind DSS initialised

Author: I agree!

> Install the kubectl snap

Reviewer 3: Can we follow the same document structure as the NVIDIA one?
- Install the Intel Device Plugin
    - Have the kubectl subsection there
    - Have the commands for verifying the Intel GPU is visible (commands on `intel_gpu_top` and note about HWE here?)
- Verify the Intel Device Plugin is up
- Verify the DSS detects the GPU

cc @afgambin

Reviewer: Yes, pls

---------------------------

> First, install the `kubectl` snap package:

Reviewer: Installing kubectl should not be part of this guide.

Reviewer: I would drop this entire section

Author: Note that the `kubectl` snap is a requirement in our case, see [this comment](https://github.com/canonical/data-science-stack/issues/148#issuecomment-2273234977). What do you think @kimwnasptd?

Reviewer 3: unfortunately yes, because of a bug in `microk8s.kubectl` we will have to install this binary

Reviewer: I get that, i.e., the user needs to use `kubectl` but explaining how to install it is not part of the guide. Then, add `kubectl` as part of the requirements/prerequisites with a link for installation/getting started. 

Caveat: in how-tos, we need to be very use-case specific and explain the things that really refer to the goal of the guide. We also expect some prior knowledge from the user. E.g., if you (user) don't know what is kubectl and how to install it, go somewhere else to find that info and then come back.

Author: That makes sense, I'll add it as a requirement and mention that we want to install the snap package specifically.

Author: The problem then is where should we put these parts that are necessary for kubectl to communicate with MicroK8s:
```
  mkdir -p ~/.kube
  microk8s config > ~/.kube/config
```

Reviewer: The section is dropped. We do not add any of this info. It does not seem to be specific to the Intel case, right? It is just part of the kubectl installation phase. Or am I wrong?

Author: It's specifically for when you use `kubectl` to communicate with `microk8s`. I don't there is a specific part of documentation that shows this, because in most cases we just use `microk8s.kubectl`.

Reviewer: I see, but that's not related to DSS at all then IMO. If that is not documented anywhere, then it is a problem (that ideally we should report) of `kubectl` / `microK8s` teams and they should address.

If you think that avoiding presenting this info is going to block users to enable their Intel GPUs, then let's see how we add it here, but we should avoid this sort of documentation practices. It feels to me like to do a certain recipe that requires a pan, you find the instructions on how to build a pan in that recipe. That breaks the independence across products (which is already happening a lot within Canonical stack, but we need to start avoiding it).

@kimwnasptd  thoughts?

Reviewer 2: Agreed.

1. The kubectl tool would've been installed a priori when deploying microk8s 
2. All kubectl configurations are not related at all to intel gpus, as Angel says.
3. There should be a documentation on kubectl on how to do this, if it's not, then there is an issue with kubectl's docs, as Angel says.

.. code-block:: bash
				
  sudo snap install kubectl -–classic

Create a configuration file so that `kubectl` can communicate with MicroK8s by running:

.. code-block:: bash
				
  mkdir -p ~/.kube
  microk8s config > ~/.kube/config

Enable the Intel GPU plugin in your Kubernetes cluster 
------------------------------------------------------

> To ensure DSS can utilise Intel GPUs, you have to enable the Intel GPU plugin in your Kubernetes cluster. The plugin uses the `Intel device plugins for Kubernetes`_ to detect whether an Intel GPU exists on a machine. You can see the `Installation with NFD`_ page for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To ensure DSS can utilise Intel GPUs, enable the Intel GPU plugin in your Kubernetes cluster. This plugin uses the `Intel device plugins for Kubernetes`_ to detect whether an Intel GPU exists on a machine. See `Installation with NFD`_  for more details.
```

Reviewer: @mvlassis when adding references, we do not necessarily need to add all of them to links.txt, if we think we won't use them that often. You can just add them as custom links, e.g., `Canonical website <https://canonical.com/>`_. For reference: https://canonical-documentation-with-sphinx-and-readthedocscom.readthedocs-hosted.com/style-guide/#external-links

Author: OK, noted for future guides.

> To enable the plugin, you must download the appropriate `kustomization.yaml` files from Intel’s device plugins for Kubernetes repository, and then apply them on your MicroK8s cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable the plugin, download the appropriate `kustomization.yaml` files from Intel’s device plugins for Kubernetes repository, and then apply them on your MicroK8s cluster.
```

Reviewer: Add link to the repository here. I assume it is the same one as above, then remove it from there (probably the whole sentence), and add it here. Users will likely check it at this point and not before.

Author: Done

> First, build the YAML files for Node Feature Discovery, Node Feature Rules, and the GPU plugin, by running:

Reviewer: What do we mean by "build" here? You mentioned before that the user downloaded those files, so I understand they don't have to be created.

Author: There is one extra part: We download the `kustomziation.yaml` files, then we run `kubectl kustomize` on them, and then we apply the resulting `.yaml` files. I will update the wording to reflect this

.. code-block:: bash

  VERSION=v0.30.0
  kubectl kustomize https://github.com/intel/intel-device-plugins-for-kubernetes/deployments/nfd?ref=${VERSION} > node_feature_discovery.yaml
  kubectl kustomize https://github.com/intel/intel-device-plugins-for-kubernetes/deployments/nfd/overlays/node-feature-rules?ref=${VERSION} > node_feature_rules.yaml
  kubectl kustomize https://github.com/intel/intel-device-plugins-for-kubernetes/deployments/gpu_plugin/overlays/nfd_labeled_nodes?ref=${VERSION} > gpu_plugin.yaml

> To allow multiple containers to utilise the same GPU, run:

Reviewer: Is this step optional?

Author: @misohu What do you think?

.. code-block:: bash
				
  sed -i 's/enable-monitoring/enable-monitoring\n        - -shared-dev-num=10/' gpu_plugin.yaml

> Then, apply the created YAML files to your MicroK8s cluster by running:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, apply the downloaded YAML files to your MicroK8s cluster by running:
```
Weren't they downloaded?

Author: Well
We download `kustomization.yaml` files, and we apply `kubectl kustomize` on them, and then we redirect the output to .yaml files. So I think in this case "create" is slightly more fitting.

.. code-block:: bash
				
  kubectl apply -f node_feature_discovery.yaml
  kubectl apply -f node_feature_rules.yaml
  kubectl apply -f gpu_plugin.yaml

> The MicroK8s cluster should now be configured to recognise and utilise your Intel GPU.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The MicroK8s cluster is now configured to recognise and utilise your Intel GPU.
```

.. note::
 After the YAML configuration files have been applied, they can be safely deleted.

> Finally, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> Verify the DSS CLI detects the GPU

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Verify DSS detects the GPU
```

----------------------------------

> Initialise the DSS CLI by running:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> .. code-block:: bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

>   dss initialize --kubeconfig=$(microk8s config)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  
```

> Verify the DSS CLI has detected the GPU by checking the DSS status as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Verify DSS has detected the GPU by checking the DSS status. To do so, run the following command using the DSS CLI: 
```

.. code-block:: bash

  dss status

You should expect an output like this:

.. code-block:: bash
				
  Output:
  [INFO] MLflow deployment: Ready
  [INFO] MLflow URL: http://10.152.183.68:5000
  [INFO] NVIDIA GPU acceleration: Disabled
  [INFO] Intel GPU acceleration: Enabled

See also
--------

> * To enable

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Author: I wanted to add the link to the NVIDIA GPU guide here, but I forgot! Adding it now.

Reviewer: @kimwnasptd  I am not sure about this, do we expect an Intel GPU user to have also interest on NVIDIA settings and viceversa?

Reviewer 3: @afgambin yes, in cases where a user might have a machine with Integrated Intel GPU and a dedicated NVIDIA GPU.

So I'd keep it there but with a small restructure of the text (?)

Reviewer: We also need to add the link to this one in the NVIDIA page (See also section). @DnPlas

Reviewer 2: I'd say this information is already in the sidebar and we don't need it here. The link we'd be adding here is not to a guide that tells users how to enable both GPUs, or what to do when both GPUs are available, so maybe it is not entirely needed? @afgambin wdyt?

Reviewer 2: I see this is an old comment, and the link has been added actually. Feel free to resolve the discussion. I will not make any changes on this.
